\ifx\pdfminorversion\undefined
 \pdfoptionpdfminorversion=3
\else
 \pdfminorversion=3
\fi
\input texinfo

@setfilename vlink.texi
@settitle vlink manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@set UPDATED February 2022

@ifinfo
This is the manual for the portable multi-format linker vlink.

Copyright 1997-2022 Frank Wille
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title vlink portable multi-format linker
@author Frank Wille
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@page
@end titlepage

@paragraphindent 0
@contents


@chapter General

@section Introduction
@command{vlink} is a portable linker which can be configured to support multiple
input and output file formats at once. It even allows to link input files
with a different format in a single run and generate the output file format
of your choice from it.

The linker supports linking with objects, object archives (static libraries)
and shared objects or libraries. It can generate an executable file with or
without additional information for dynamic linking, a shared object, or
a new object suitable for another linker pass.

Empty sections and other unused data are deleted to achieve a size-optimized
output.

@section Legal
    vlink is copyright 1995-2022 by Frank Wille.

    This archive may be redistributed without modifications and used
    for non-commercial purposes.

    An exception for commercial usage is granted, provided that the
    target OS is AmigaOS/68k. Resulting binaries may be distributed
    commercially without further licensing.

    In all other cases you need my written consent.


@section Installation

@command{vlink} comes as a stand-alone program, so no further
installation is necessary.
To use @command{vlink} with @command{vbcc}, copy the binary to
@file{vbcc/bin}, following the installation instructions for
@command{vbcc}.


@chapter The Linker

@section Usage
@command{vlink} links the object and archive files given on the command line
into a new object file. The output object file is either an executable
program, a shared object suitable for loading at run-time, or an
object file that can once again be processed by @command{vlink}.

Object files and archives are processed in the order given on the command
line. Unlike other linkers you usually have to specify each library to link
against only once, as @command{vlink} is smart enough to figure out all dependencies.

The file format of an input object file is determined automatically
by the linker. The default output file format is compiled in
(see @option{-v}) and may be changed by @option{-b}. Optionally, the default
library search path can also be compiled in and is visible with
@option{-v} as well.

The number of output file formats included is configurable at compile time.

@section Supported File Formats
The following file formats are supported:

@table @code

@item a.out
Currently supported:
@itemize @minus
  @item aoutnull (Default with standard relocs and undefined endianness)
  @item aoutbsd68k (NetBSD/68k)
  @item aoutbsd68k4k (NetBSD/68k 4K page size)
  @item aoutsun010 (SunOS 68010 and AmigaOS/Atari 68000/010)
  @item aoutsun020 (SunOS 68020 and AmigaOS/Atari 68020-68060)
  @item aoutbsdi386 (NetBSD/i386)
  @item aoutpc386
  @item aoutmint (Embeds a.out in TOS format for Atari MiNT executables,
                  supports extra options like the @code{ataritos} format)
  @item aoutjaguar (M68k with special, word-swapped RISC relocations)
@end itemize
Small data offset: @code{0x8000} (unused).
Linker symbols:
@code{__GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_}, @code{__PROCEDURE_LINKAGE_TABLE_},
@code{__DYNAMIC}.

@item amigahunk
The AmigaDos hunk format for M68k. Requires AmigaOS 2.04 with
@option{-Rshort}.
No shared objects. Small data offset @code{0x7ffe}. Linker symbols:
@itemize @minus
  @item _DATA_BAS_ (PhxAss)
  @item _DATA_LEN_ (PhxAss)
  @item _BSS_LEN_ (PhxAss)
  @item _LinkerDB
  @item __BSSBAS (SASC/StormC)
  @item __BSSLEN (SASC/StormC)
  @item ___ctors (SASC/StormC)
  @item ___dtors (SASC/StormC)
  @item _RESLEN (SASC)
  @item _RESBASE (SASC)
  @item _NEWDATAL (SASC)
  @item __DATA_BAS (DICE-C)
  @item __DATA_LEN (DICE-C)
  @item __BSS_LEN (DICE-C)
  @item __RESIDENT (DICE-C)
  @item ___machtype (GNU-gcc)
  @item ___text_size (GNU-gcc)
  @item ___data_size (GNU-gcc)
  @item ___bss_size (GNU-gcc)
@end itemize
Automatic constructor/destructor function tables:
@code{___ctors} and @code{___dtors} (will be mapped automatically to
@code{__CTOR_LIST__} and @code{__DTOR_LIST__}). Fastcall-ABI
constructors/destructors replace standard ABI ones, when using
identical name and priority.

Referencing @code{_RESLEN} switches the hunk-format output module
into Resident mode, which will append a special relocation table to the
initialized part of the data-bss section and warns about absolute
references from other sections. This mode can be used to create
reentrable, "pure" programs, for use with the AmigaOS @command{resident}
command.

Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Rshort}. The target-specific
@option{-hunkattr} can be used to overwrite the memory flags of an input
section.
This format was called "amigaos" in former @command{vlink} versions.

@item amigaehf
An extension of the AmigaDOS hunk format for the PowerPC,
32-bit, big endian, as introduced by Haage&Partner GmbH for WarpOS. No
executables (they are in @code{amigahunk} format) or shared objects.
The same linker symbols, constructors/destructors as under
@code{amigahunk} are supported. Additionally, @code{@@_name} symbols will
be created on demand (when referenced).
Supports @option{-Rstd}, @option{-Rshort} and the target-specific
@option{-hunkattr}.

@item amsdos
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin2, but with a header
for Amstrad/Schneider CPC computers.

@item applebin
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with a header
for Apple DOS 3.3 binary files, suitable for Apple II computers.

@item ataricom
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with a file header
and section headers for Atari 8-bit computers (Atari 400, 600, 800, etc.).

@item ataritos
Atari-ST TOS file format. Executables only at the moment. Symbol table
in extended DRI format. Symbols may be section- or start-based (option
@option{-tos-textbased}). Additionally is supports the target-specific
options: @option{-tos-flags}, @option{-tos-fastload},
@option{-tos-fastram}, @option{-tos-fastalloc}, @option{-tos-private},
@option{-tos-global}, @option{-tos-super}, @option{-tos-readable}.
The internal linker script defines _LinkerDB for small
data and supports @command{vbcc}-style
constructor/destructor tables
in the data section (@code{__CTOR_LIST__} and @code{__DTOR_LIST__}).

@item bbc
Absolute raw binary output, but additionally writes an @file{.inf}-file for
BBC Micro/Master emulators.

@item cbmprg
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with a header
for Commodore 8-bit computers (PET, VIC-20, 64, etc.).

@item cbmreu
Writes multiple images files for the REU memory expansion. Only the
first one has a Commodore PRG header.

@item cocoml
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with segment headers
and a trailer for Tandy Color Computer machine language files.

@item dragonbin
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with a header for
Dragon DOS binary files, suitable for Dragon 32 and 64 computers.

@item elf32amigaos
Identical to elf32ppcbe, but when doing dynamic linking it requires that
also all references from shared objects are resolved at link time. This
is due to a limitation of the AmigaOS4 dynamic link editor (elf.library).

@item elf32arm
ELF (executable linkable format) for the ARM architecture.
32-bit, little endian. Small data offset: @code{0x1000}. Linker
Symbols: @code{_SDA_BASE_}. Automatic constructor/destructor
function tables will be placed into the sections @code{.ctors}
and @code{.dtors}. Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32aros
ELF i386 32-bit little endian like @code{elf32i386}, but generates
relocatable object files as executables. This format is
used for the AROS (Amiga Research OS) operating system.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32i386
ELF (executable linkable format) for Intel 386 and better,
32-bit, little endian. No small data. Automatic constructor/destructor
function tables will be placed into the sections
@code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32jag
ELF (executable linkable format) for Atari Jaguar RISC, 32-bit,
big endian. Small data offset: @code{0}. Linker symbols:
@code{_SDA_BASE_}. Automatic constructor/destructor function
tables will be placed into the sections @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32m68k
ELF (executable linkable format) for Motorola M68k, 32-bit,
big endian. Small data offset: @code{0x8000}. Linker symbols:
@code{_SDA_BASE_}. Automatic constructor/destructor function
tables will be placed into the sections @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32morphos
Nearly identical to elf32powerup. Only difference is that
@code{.sdata} and @code{.sbss} sections will not be merged as the MorphOS
loader will take care of it. This format is used for MorphOS.

@item elf32powerup
ELF PowerPC 32-bit big endian like @code{elf32ppcbe}, but generates
relocatable object files as executables. This format is
used for the PowerUp kernel. The linker symbol @code{_LinkerDB} is
defined for @command{vbccppc}-compatibility.
Small data offset: @code{0x8000}.
This format was also called @code{elf32amiga} in former @command{vlink}
versions.

@item elf32ppcbe
ELF (executable linkable format) for PowerPC, 32-bit,
big endian. Small data offset: @code{0x8000}. Linker symbols:
@code{_SDA_BASE_} and @code{_SDA2_BASE} (EABI only). Automatic
constructor/destructor function tables will be placed into the
sections @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.

@item elf64x86
ELF (executable linkable format) for the x86_64 architecture.
64-bit, little endian. No small data. Automatic constructor/destructor
function tables will be placed into the sections
@code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item ihex
Intel Hex format. No symbols. Output format only.
Without a linker script, the raw binary will be relocated to base address 0.

@item jagsrv
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with a header to make
it load and execute via the Atari Jaguar SkunkBoard or the VirtualJaguar
emulator.

@item o65-02
The o65 binary relocation format for the 6502 family V1.3, as defined by
Andre Fachat. Supports reading and writing object files and executables,
which may be relocatable.
The following target-specific options are supported: @option{-o65-align},
@option{-o65-author}, @option{-o65-bsszero}, @option{-o65-cpu},
@option{-o65-fopts}, @option{-o65-name}, @option{-o65-paged},
@option{-o65-stack}.

@item o65-816
The o65 binary relocation format for 65816 processors V1.3, as defined by
Andre Fachat. Supports reading and writing object files and executables,
which may be relocatable.
The following target-specific options are supported: @option{-o65-align},
@option{-o65-author}, @option{-o65-bsszero},
@option{-o65-fopts}, @option{-o65-name}, @option{-o65-paged},
@option{-o65-stack}.

@item oricmc
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, but with a header for
machine code files, suitable for ORIC-1, Atmos, Telestrat and Pravetz
computers.
The following target-specific options are supported: @option{-autox}.

@item os9-6809
OS-9 program modules for the 6809 processor, as defined by Microware
Systems Corporation and the NitrOS-9 project.
Code is always position-independent and reentrant. Relocation tables
for data-text and data-data references are appended at the initialized
data section in the module. These tables have to be processed by the
program's startup code. @command{vbcc}-style constructor/destructor tables
will be created and placed into the data section. By default, the
module name will be the same as the output file name.
No support for symbol tables.
Supports target-specific options: @option{-os9-mem}, @option{-os9-name},
@option{-os9-ns}, @option{-os9-rev}.

@item rawbin1
Absolute raw binary file. The sections and base addresses
have to be specified by a linker script (option @option{-T}). Gaps
between sections are filled with 0-bytes. Without a linker
script, the raw binary will be relocated to base address 0.
When option @option{-q} (keep relocs) has been specified, the linker
will not execute absolute address relocations, but append a relocation
offset table at the end of the file. The width of a word in this
table matches the target's address size and uses the target's endianness.
The first word defines the size of the following table. You may reference
it by using the @code{__end} symbol, which marks the end of the
bss section. It follows a byte-stream for the reloction offsets.
A byte between 1 and 255 represents the distance in bytes
to the next relocation offset (starts at zero).
A 0-byte indicates that the following word contains a distance greater
than 255. Your startup code has to add the program's start address to the
address values in all these locations. Warning: remaining relocations, like
PC-relative, or other absolute relocations not matching the address size,
will still be resolved by the linker! Which may be desired, or not.

@item rawbin2
Similar to rawbin1. The only difference is that a new output file will
be created, for each section which caused a gap larger than 15 bytes to
the previous section. The new file name will get the section's name
appended after a dot.

@item rawseg
Creates a raw binary file for each segment. Segments can be defined in a
@code{PHDR} block of the linker script. It defaults to text and data segments.
The segment names, their base address and length are written into the output
file while the binary files get their segment name appended to the original
file name.
When option @option{-q} (keep relocs) has been specified, then additional files
containing the relocation offsets are created. The first word in each file
defines the number of relocations. The width of all words in this table
matches the target's address size. Note, that only simple address relocations
with the full address size are supported (no halfwords, etc.), which makes
it nearly useless for certain targets, like the 6502 or RISC CPUs.

@item sinclairql
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin1, for the 68008-based
Sinclair QL computer. Prepends a QDOS file header (default, @option{-qhdr}
or an XTcc trailer (@option{-xtcc}). These headers are mostly used
directly by emulators or for file transfer.
The following target-specific options are supported: @option{-qhdr},
@option{-xtcc}, @option{-stack=<n>}.

@item srec19
@itemx srec28
@itemx srec37
Motorola S-Record format. No symbols. Output format only.
Without a linker script, the raw binary will be relocated to base address 0.

@item vobj-le
@itemx vobj-be
VOBJ file format, generated by the @command{vasm} assembler. VOBJ is
a read-only object file format and is designed to support
any little- or big-endian architecture with all their
specific relocations.

@item xfile
Human68k XFile format, as used on Sharp X68000 computers.
Executables only at the moment. Symbol table supports absolute symbols
and relocatable symbols from the text, data and bss segment. The format
has no differentiation between local and global scope.
The internal linker script defines _LinkerDB for small
data and supports @command{vbcc}-style
constructor/destructor tables
in the data section (@code{__CTOR_LIST__} and @code{__DTOR_LIST__}).

@end table

@section Linker Options
Usually options and input file names can be mixed. Order of options may be
important (e.g. when specifying a library with @option{-l} or a search path
with @option{-L}).

The following general options are supported:
@table @option

@item -Bdynamic
Specifies that linking against dynamic libraries can take
place. If a library specifier of the form @option{-lx} appears on
the command line, @command{vlink} searches for a library of the from
@file{libx.so.n.m} (see the @option{-l} option) according to the search
rules in effect. If such a file can not be found a traditional archive
is looked for. This options can appear anywhere on the command line and is
complementary to @option{-Bstatic}.

@item -Bstatic
The counterpart of @option{-Bdynamic}. This option turns off dynamic
linking for all library specifiers until a @option{-Bdynamic} is once
again given. Any explicitly mentioned shared object encountered on the
command line while this option is in effect is flagged as an error.

@item -Bshareable
Instructs the linker to build a shared object from the object
files rather than a normal executable image.

@item -Bsymbolic
This option causes all symbolic references in the output to be
resolved in this link-edit session. The only remaining run-
time relocation requirements are base-relative relocations,
ie. translation with respect to the load address. Failure to
resolve any symbolic reference causes an error to be reported.

@item -Bforcearchive
Force all members of archives to be loaded, whether or not such
members contribute a definition to any plain object files.
Useful for making a shared library from an archive of PIC
objects without having to unpack the archive.

@item -b targetname
Specifies target file format for the output file. See
also "Supported file formats".

@item -baseoff offset
Defines section offset for base-relative relocations. The
default offset is target-dependent (e.g. @code{0x7ffe} for amigaos
and @code{0x8000} for elf32m68k).

@item -C constructor-type
Defines the type of constructor/destructor function names
to scan for. Valid types are:
@table @code
  @item gnu
    GNU style constructors
  @item vbcc
    vbcc style constructors: @code{__INIT[_<pri>]_<name> / __EXIT..}
  @item vbccelf
    vbcc style constructors: @code{_INIT[_<pri>]_<name> / _EXIT..}
  @item sasc
    SAS/C style constructors: @code{__STI[_<pri>]_<name> / __STD..}
@end table

@item -Crel
Function references in the constructor/destructor tables (see above)
are written as relative offsets to their current table position instead
of absolute pointers. Useful for PC-relative code.

@item -clr-adduscore
No longer add a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects on the command line.

@item -clr-deluscore
No longer delete a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects on the command line.

@item -D linkersymbol[=value]
Define the linker symbol @code{linkersymbol}, so it may be referenced
by linker script expressions and from object code. The optional @code{value}
is assigned to it, which defaults to @code{1}.

@item -d
@itemx -dc
@itemx -dp
Force allocation of common symbols, even when producing relocatable
output (@option{-r} option).

@item -da
Force allocation of address symbols (PowerOpen), even when producing
relocatable output (@option{-r} option).

@item -e entrypoint
Defines the entry point of an executable and may be either
a symbol or an absolute address. The linker will set the
entry point by trying each of the following methods in order,
stopping when the first succeeds:
@enumerate
  @item -e option
  @item @code{ENTRY()} command in a linker script
  @item value of the symbol @code{_start}, if defined
  @item start of the first executable code section
  @item address 0
@end enumerate

@item -EB
Presets big-endian mode for reading input and writing output.

@item -EL
Presets little-endian mode for reading input and writing output.

@item -export-dynamic
Put all global symbols of the output file into the dynamic symbol table,
making them visible for shared objects loaded on demand (e.g. by
@code{dlopen()}).

@item -f flavour
Adds a library-flavour. All flavours are cumulatively
appended to each library search-path, whenever a library
 was specified with @option{-l}.
Example: One search path and two flavours will search in:
@enumerate
  @item @file{<lib-path>},
  @item @file{<lib-path>/<flavour1>} and
  @item @file{<lib-path>/<flavour1>/<flavour2>}
@end enumerate

@item -F filename
A list of object file names is read from the specified file.
Useful, if the number of objects exceeds the length of the command line.

@item -fixunnamed
All unnamed sections will get a default name according to
their section type (@code{.text}, @code{.data} and @code{.bss}).

@item -gc-all
Section garbage collection.
Starting from the executable's entry point, determine all referenced
sections and delete the unreferenced ones.

@item -gc-empty
Delete all empty sections from an executable, which are not referenced
from anywhere in the linked input files.
Note: Before V1.5d vlink tried to do that always, but it didn't work in
any case.

@item -h
Prints a short help text.

@item -interp interpreter-path
Defines the name of the interpreter, which is usually the
dynamic linker for dynamically linked ELF executables.
Defaults to @file{/usr/lib/ld.so.1}.

@item -k
Keeps the original section order as found in the object files from the
command line. Otherwise vlink links all code sections first, then all data
and finally all bss, even when the first object starts with data.
Has no meaning when using a linker script!

@item -L library-search-path
Add path to the list of directories to search for libraries
specified with the @option{-l} option. When a default search path
was compiled in (see @option{-v}), then it is searched last, before
finally looking into the local directory.

@item -l library-specifier
This option specifies a library to be considered for inclusion
in the output. If the @option{-Bdynamic} option is in effect, a shared
library of the form @file{lib<spec>.so.m.n} (where @code{m} is the
major, and @code{n} is the minor version number, respectively) is searched
for first. The library with the highest version found in the
search path is selected. If no shared library is found or
the @option{-Bstatic} option is in effect, an archive of the form
@file{lib<spec>.a} is looked for in the library search path.
For @code{amigaos}/@code{amigaehf} file formats, the libraries are
called @file{<spec>.lib}.

@item -M[file name]
Produce output about the mapping of sections of the input
files and the values assigned to symbols in the output file.
When the optional @code{file name} is missing output goes to stdout.

@item -m
Enable special treatment of feature-mask suffixes in symbol names.
A decimal number after the last '@code{.}' in a symbol name is
stored as a feature-mask for symbol definitions. The masks in references to
the symbol's name (sans suffix) are combined to a common requirement
mask, which is used to find the best symbol to fulfill this requirement
(i.e. the smallest mask which has still all bits of the requirement-mask
set).

@item -minalign alignment
Set a minimum alignment (number of bits which have to be zero) for all
imported sections. The specified @code{alignment} value will only take
effect when higher than the section's current alignment. It defaults to 0.

@item -mrel
Automatically merge sections, when there are PC-relative references
between them.

@item -mtype
Merge all sections of the same type (code, data, bss), even when
their names or attributes differ.

@item -mall
Merge all sections into a single output section.

@item -multibase
The default behaviour of @command{vlink} is to merge all sections
which are accessed base-relative. This guarantees a single
small data section, which can be accessed through a base
register.
If this is not desired - maybe you have several base registers and
small data sections - you can disable this behaviour by specifying
@option{-multibase}.

@item -N oldname newname
Rename all input sections named @file{oldname} into @file{newname}.
This setting is valid for all the following input files and libraries on
the command line and can be disabled with @code{-N oldname oldname}.
Multiple @option{-N} options are allowed.

@item -n
No page alignment of sections or segments in the final
executable (@code{NMAGIC}).

@item -nostdlib
Ignore default library search path, if one was compiled in.

@item -nowarn=n
Do not display warning number @code{n}. May occur multiple times.

@item -o filename
Specifies the name of the output file. Defaults to @file{a.out}.

@item -osec
Output each section as an individual file. The file name given with
@option{-o} will be ignored. Only available for some target formats:
rawbin1, rawbin2, amsdos, cbmprg.

@item -osec=basename
Works like @option{-osec}, but each output file name will be preceded
by @file{"basename."}.

@item -P symbol
Protect a symbol from stripping. This doesn't work for all targets!

@item -q
Emit relocations, even for absolute executables.

@item -R format
Sets the relocation table format. Usually there is no need
to change the default format defined by the target (@option{-b} option).
Valid format strings are:
@table @code
  @item std
    standard format with addends in the code
  @item add
    addends are stored in the relocation table
  @item short
    relocation table with short offsets (e.g. 16 bit)
@end table
Note that most targets only support one or two of these formats.

@item -r
Produce relocatable object file, suitable for another linker pass.

@item -rpath library-search-path
Add a directory to the runtime library search path. This is used
when linking an ELF executable with shared objects. All @option{-rpath}
arguments are concatenated and passed to the runtime linker,
which uses them to locate shared objects at runtime.

@item -S
Strip all debugger symbols from the output.

@item -s
Strip all symbols from the output.

@item -sc
Merge all code sections to a single code section (small code).

@item -sd
Merge all data and bss sections to a single data-bss section (small data).

@item -set-adduscore
Start adding a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects on the command line.

@item -set-deluscore
Start deleting a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects on the command line.

@item -shared
Instructs the linker to build a shared object from the object
files rather than a normal executable image.

@item -soname name
Sets the "real name" of a shared object or library. For ELF
this will create the @code{SONAME} tag in the @code{.dynamic}
section.

@item -T script
Specifies a linker script, which defines the mapping of input
sections and their absolute locations in memory.
The command language used is meant to be nearly identical to that
used in GNU linker scripts, although not everything is implemented
and there are a few additional commands. @xref{Linker Scripts}.

@item -Ttext addr
Set the base address of the first section. It can be overridden by
a linker script.
Without a linker script it either sets the start address of the first
section or of any section, depending on the output format.

@item -t
Trace the linker's file accesses.

@item -textbaserel
Allow base-relative access on code sections. Otherwise the
linker will display a warning.

@item -u symbol
Marks symbol as undefined in the first section which was
found on the command line. This might trigger linking of
additional modules from standard libraries.
This is equivalent to the linker script command EXTERN.

@item -V version
Minimum major version of shared object to be linked behind this option.

@item -v
Prints @command{vlink} version string, default library search path
and implemented target file formats.

@item -vicelabels filename
Generates a label address mapping file for the VICE debugger.

@item -w
Suppress all warning messages.

@item -X
Discard local symbols in the input files that start with the
letters 'L' or 'l', or with a dot.

@item -x
Discard all local symbols in the input files.

@item -y symbol
Trace the manipulations inflicted on symbol.

@item -Z
Do not move trailing zero-bytes in an initialized section into the
uninitialized part of it, when generating executable output files.
Usually the uninitialized part of a section is determined by the
difference between the section's real size and file size (for
those file formats which support it).
@end table

@subsection Target specific options @code{amigahunk}, @code{amigaehf}
@table @option

@item -broken-debug
Try to ignore free-floating debug hunks, which are used in an illegal
way like a section, together with relocations.

@item -hunkattr secname=value
Overwrite the memory attributes of all input sections named @code{secname}
with @code{value}. For example allocate the @code{DATA} section in
Chip-RAM: @code{-hunkattr DATA=2}. Extended memory attributes are supported.

@end table

@subsection Target specific options @code{aoutmint}, @code{ataritos}
@table @option

@item -tos-flags value
Set the 32 bit flags field of the Atari TOS header to @code{value}.

@item -tos-fastload
Sets the fastload bit (0) in the TOS header.

@item -tos-fastram
Sets the fastram bit (1) in the TOS header.

@item -tos-fastalloc
Sets the fastalloc bit (2) in the TOS header.

@item -tos-private
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as private.

@item -tos-global
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as global (read/write
by any process).

@item -tos-super
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as read-writeable by
processes in supervisor mode only.

@item -tos-readable
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as read-only for other
processes.

@item -tos-textbased
Writes text-based (offset to program start) DRI symbols to a TOS executable,
like Devpac does. Otherwise symbol offsets are based on the section they are
defined in.

@end table

@subsection Target specific options @code{o65-02}, @code{o65-816}
@table @option

@item -o65-align val
Set minimum alignment for all sections as number of least significant bits
which have to be zero. @code{val} may be 0, 1, 2, 8. Default behaviour is
to use the maximum alignment given by the input sections.

@item -o65-author name
Store the given author name in the output.

@item -o65-bsszero
Set a flag in the header which requests automatic clearing of the
@code{.bss} section.

@item -o65-cpu cpumodel
Defines that the executable uses the instruction set of the given
6502-model @code{cpumodel}.
Known models are: 6502, 65c02, 65sc02, 65ce02, nmos6502, 65816 (in 6502
emulation mode). Option is not available for @code{o65-816}, which is
native 65816.

@item -o65-fopts
Enable informational header options, generated by the linker: file name,
linker name and version, creation date.

@item -o65-name name
Set the "name" header option to @code{name}. Overwrites the real name
which would be written by @option{-o65-fopts}.

@item -o65-paged
Make the output file use paged alignment and simplified paged relocations.

@item -o65-stack val
Store required stack size as @code{val} to the header.

@end table

@subsection Target specific options @code{oricmc}
@table @option

@item -autox
Set the auto-execute flag in the header, so the program starts
automatically after loading.

@end table

@subsection Target specific options @code{os9-6809}
@table @option

@item -os9-mem=val[K]
Defines the size of the stack and the parameter area, which the
linker will add to the permanent storage size in the module header.
The value given in @code{val} is in bytes. You may specify
the value in K-bytes by appending a '@code{k}' character.
The size of the stack and parameter area defaults to 1024 bytes for
OS9/6809.

@item -os9-name=modname
Set the name of the OS-9 module to @code{modname}. Otherwise it defaults
to the name of the output file or may be specified in the code, labeled
by the symbol @code{__modname}.

@item -os9-ns
Declare the OS-9 module as non-shareable and non-reentrant. It resets
the shareable-flag in the module header, which is set otherwise.

@item -os9-rev=val
Set the revision in the OS-9 module header to @code{val}. Must be a value
between 0 and 15. Defaults to zero.

@end table

@subsection Target specific options @code{sinclairql}
@table @option

@item -qhdr
Prepend a QDOS file header (default).

@item -xtcc
Append an XTcc style trailer.

@item -stack=val
Set the stack size required by the program to @code{val}. Affects the
dataspace size calculation. Defaults to 4096.

@end table


@node Linker Scripts
@chapter Linker Scripts

@node Memory
@section Memory Layout
By default sections may be allocated in all available memory. You
can define specific memory regions by using the @code{MEMORY} command.
The syntax is:

@example
MEMORY @{
  memblockname (attr) : ORIGIN = org, LENGTH = len
  ...
@}
@end example

Defines one of more memory regions with start address @code{org} and a
length of @code{len} bytes. The attributes in @code{(attr)} are optional
and will be ignored by vlink, when specified (just for compatibility, at
the moment). The keywords @code{ORIGIN} and @code{LENGTH} may be
abbreviated down to a single character (@code{o=} and @code{l=}).
Once a memory region is defined as @code{memblockname} the output of
sections can be redirected into it by appending @code{>memblockname} at
the end of a section definition.

@section Output Sections
@example
SECTIONS @{
  ...
@}
@end example
This is the only mandatory block in each linker script and is used to
define the mapping of input sections to output sections, as well as
their location in memory.

Within this block there may be symbol assignments, also for the location
counter (@code{.}), commands and output section definitions.

A symbol assignment looks like
@example
symbol = expression;
@end example
where @code{expression} may contain the usual arithmetic operations,
other symbols and functions (@xref{Functions}). The special symbol
@code{.} (dot) is the location counter and defines the current address
(VMA) in memory where the following sections and data are placed.

An optional symbol assignment looks like
@example
symbol =? expression;
@end example
where the only difference to a normal symbol assignment is, that
@code{symbol} will only be defined with the given expression when it was
not already defined before (in a line above, or on the command line
with option @option{-D}).

All valid linker-script commands are described here: @xref{Commands}.

An output section definition has many optional attributes and looks like
this in its complete form:
@example
secname vma (type) : AT(lma) @{
  file/section-patterns and commands
  ...
@} >region AT>lma-region :phdr =fill
@end example
Mandatory are only @code{secname}, the colon and the curly-braces.
Everything else is optional.
@table @code
@item secname
  Name of the output section to create at the address of the current
  location counter.
@item vma
  When given, defines the section's start address (VMA) as @code{vma}
  and also redefines the location counter.
@item (type)
  Optional. The only valid @code{type} in vlink is @code{NOLOAD}, which
  avoids writing the section's contents into the output file. Usually
  this makes sense for uninitialized sections, like BSS.
@item AT(lma)
  Optionally sets the load-address (LMA) of the section to @code{lma}.
  Useful for initialized data loaded into ROM, which is copied to its
  real address in RAM during startup.
@item >region
  Optionally redirects this output section into memory region @code{region}
  (defined by the @code{MEMORY} command, @xref{Memory}).
  Each memory region has its own location counter!
@item AT>lma-region
  Optionally load this output section into memory region @code{lma-region}
  (defined by the @code{MEMORY} command, @xref{Memory}).
  Each memory region has its own location counter!
@item :phdr
  Defines that the output section should go into program segment @code{phdr}.
  PHDR segments are used in ELF executables and in vlink's @code{rawseg}
  output target. Optional. Uses the last @code{phdr} when omitted.
@item =fill
  @code{fill} optionally defines a 16-bit pattern used to fill skipped
  or undefined regions in the output section (refer to @code{FILL16}).
@end table

Between the curly-braces there may be linker-script commands
(@xref{Commands}), symbol assignments and one or multiple input section
specifications. An input section specification consists of a 
single file-pattern and one or multiple section-patterns, which looks like:
@code{fpat(spat1 spat2...)}.

To match multiple files or sections the usual wildcards may be used for
file- and section-patterns. The wildcard capabilities depend on the host
operating system vlink is running on, so do not expect that anything more
than '@code{*}' (match any string) and '@code{?}' (match any character)
will work.

The matching input files and their matching input sections will be included
into the output section at this point.

The following functions are valid when specifying input section patterns:
@table @code
@item KEEP(fpat(spat...))
  Always keep these input sections in the output. Never delete them by any
  form of garbage collection (e.g. @option{-gc-all} or @option{-gc-empty}).
@item SORT(fpat)(spat...)
  Sort the file names to include sections from.
@item fpat(SORT(spat...))
  Include matching input sections sorted.
@end table

@section Program Headers
@example
PHDRS @{
  phdrname type FILEHDR PHDRS AT(addr) FLAGS(flags);
  ...
@}
@end example
Program headers are also known as segments and mainly used in ELF
executables. Segments define a block of multiple sections with similar
attributes (e.g. executable and read-only or read-write). The linker
defines reasonable default Program Headers, but you may want to overwrite
the default.

@table @code
@item phdrname
  Defines the segment's name, which may be used in
  an output section definition, using the @code{:phdrname} syntax.
@item type
  The segment type may be @code{PT_LOAD}, @code{PT_DYNAMIC}, @code{PT_INTERP},
  @code{PT_NOTE}, @code{PT_SHLIB} or @code{PT_PHDR}. Refer to the ELF-ABI
  documentation for a precise description. @code{PT_LOAD} defines a segment
  which is loaded into memory. @code{PT_PHDR} defines a segment which
  includes the program header itself.
@item FILEHDR
  Set this optional attribute when the segment includes the (ELF)
  file header information.
@item PHDRS
  Set this optional attribute when the segment includes the program
  header table. Typically set together with @code{FILEHDR}.
@item AT(addr)
  Optionally defines the segment's start address to be @code{addr}.
@item FLAGS(flags)
  Optionally defines the segment permission as @code{flags}, where bit 0
  means executable, bit 1 means writable and bit 2 means readable.
@end table

@node Commands
@section Commands
The following commands are currently supported in vlink linker scripts:

@table @code

@item ASSERT(expression,"message")
  Evaluate @code{expression} and print an assertion error, including the
  optional @code{message}, when zero.

@item BYTE(expression)
  Insert a byte at the current section address and assign the value of
  @code{expression} to it.

@item CONSTRUCTORS
  Set the constructor/destructor function collection strategy to
  GNU-style constructors. They are usually already placed into
  @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors} sections.

@item ENTRY(symbol)
  @code{symbol} defines the entry point of program execution, which may
  be used by some executable file formats. It is also used to define the
  starting point for section garbage collection (@option{-gc-all} option).

@item EXTERN(symbol [symbol ...])
  Define one or multiple symbols as undefined, which might trigger
  linking of additional modules from standard libraries. Refer to
  option @option{-u}.

@item FILL8(expression)
  Specify an 8-bit fill-pattern, which is used to fill skipped regions
  in a section (e.g. by alignments or setting a new location counter).

@item FILL16(expression)
  Specify a 16-bit fill-pattern, which is used to fill skipped regions
  in a section (e.g. by alignments or setting a new location counter).
  The @code{expression} is always written in big-endian order.

@item GROUP(file [file...])
  For compatibility. Works just like @code{INPUT} in vlink.

@item INPUT(file [file...])
  Define input files, which has exactly the same effect like on the
  command line. Specifying libraries needs a @code{-l} prefix. When there
  are also input files on the command line, the files specified here will
  be appended.

@item LONG(expression)
  Insert a 32-bit word the current section address and assign the value of
  @code{expression}, using the target's endianness, to it.

@item OUTPUT_ARCH()
@itemx OUTPUT_FORMAT()
  No meaning in vlink. Just for compatibility. Refer to option @option{-b}
  to define the output file format.

@item PROVIDE(symbol = expression)
  The @code{symbol} will only be defined with @code{expression} when it
  is referenced from anywhere in the input files.

@item QUAD(expression)
  Insert a 64-bit word the current section address and assign the value of
  @code{expression}, using the target's endianness, to it.

@item RESERVE(space)
  Reserve @code{space} bytes at the current location counter, which are
  filled with the value given by @code{FILL8()} or @code{FILL16()}
  (defaults to zero).

@item SEARCH_DIR(path)
  Appends @code{path} as an additional library search path. Has the same
  effect as @option{-L}.

@item SHORT(expression)
  Insert a 16-bit word the current section address and assign the value of
  @code{expression}, using the target's endianness, to it.

@item SQUAD(expression)
  Insert a 64-bit word the current section address and assign the value of
  @code{expression}, using the target's endianness, to it.

@item VBCC_CONSTRUCTORS
  Set the constructor/destructor function collection strategy to
  vbcc-style constructors (@code{__INIT[_<pri>]_<name> / __EXIT..})
  and put them into the current section.

@item VBCC_CONSTRUCTORS_ELF
  Set the constructor/destructor function collection strategy to
  vbcc-style ELF constructors (@code{_INIT[_<pri>]_<name> / _EXIT..})
  and put them into the current section.

@end table

@node Functions
@section Functions
The following functions are currently supported in vlink linker scripts:

@table @code

@item ADDR(sectionname)
  Return the address (VMA) of the section named @code{sectionname}.

@item ALIGN(align)
  Return the location counter (@code{.}), aligned to the next address 
  which is a multiple of @code{align}.

@item LENGTH(memoryname)
  Return the length of the memory region named @code{memoryname}.

@item LOADADDR(sectionname)
  Return the loading-address (LMA) of the section named @code{sectionname}.

@item MAX(exp1,exp2)
  Return the maximum value of the two expressions @code{exp1} and @code{exp2}.

@item MIN(exp1,exp2)
  Return the minimum value of the two expressions @code{exp1} and @code{exp2}.

@item ORIGIN(memoryname)
  Return the start address of the memory region named @code{memoryname}.

@item SIZEOF(sectionname)
  Return the size of the section named @code{sectionname} in bytes.

@item SIZEOF_HEADERS
  Return the size of the output file format's header in bytes.

@end table


@chapter Appendix

@section Known Problems
@itemize @minus
  @item Neither shared objects nor dynamically linked executables can be
    generated for @code{a.out} format.
  @item The following options are not really supported:
    @option{-S}, @option{-X}, @option{-Bsymbolic}
  @item Source level debugging support is missing for some formats.
  @item Many linker script commands are still missing.
  @item Default linker scripts are mostly missing, so you need to provide
    your own script by using the @option{-T} option.
  @item @code{PHDR} support for ELF is not perfect.
  @item The feature mask option (@option{-m}) doesn't work for EHF yet.
@end itemize

@section Credits
All those who wrote parts of the @command{vlink} distribution, made suggestions,
answered my questions, tested @command{vlink}, reported errors or were
otherwise involved in the development of @command{vlink} (in ascending
alphabetical order, probably not complete):
@itemize
  @item Karoly Balogh
  @item Volker Barthelmann
  @item Matthias Bock
  @item Dennis Boon
  @item Alexander Coers
  @item Romain Giot
  @item Stefan Haubenthal
  @item Mikael Kalms
  @item Miro Kropacek
  @item Jean-Paul Mari
  @item Gunther Nikl
  @item Thorsten Otto
  @item Keith S
  @item J@"org Strohmayer
@end itemize

@section Error Messages
@enumerate
@item Out of memory
@item Unrecognized option '%s'
@item Unknown link mode: %s
@item Unknown argument for option -d: %c
@item Option '-%c' requires an argument
@item No input files
@item File "%s" has a read error
@item Cannot open "%s": No such file or directory
@item Invalid target format "%s"
@item Directory "%s" could not be examined
@item %s: File format not recognized
@item "%s" is already an executable file
@item %s: File format corrupted
@item %s (%s): Illegal relocation type %d at %s+%x
@item %s: Unexpected end of section %s in %s
@item %s: %s appeared twice in %s
@item %s: Misplaced %s in %s
@item %s: Symbol definition %s in %s uses unsupported type %d
@item %s: Global symbol %s from %s is already defined in %s
@item %s: Unresolved reference to symbol %s in %s uses unsupported type %d
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Reference to undefined symbol %s
@item Attributes of section %s were changed from %s in %s to %s in %s
@item %s: %s expected
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Illegal relative reference to %s+0x%llx
@item %s (%s+0x%x): %dbit %s reference to %s+0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) out of range
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Referenced absolute symbol %s=0x%llx + 0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) doesn't fit into %d bits
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Illegal relative reference to symbol %s
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Relative reference to relocatable symbol %s=0x%llx + 0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) doesn't fit into %d bits
@item Can't create output file %s
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Absolute reference to relocatable symbol %s=0x%llx + 0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) doesn't fit into %d bits
@item Error while writing to %s
@item Target %s: Unsupported relocation type %s (offset=%d, size=%d, mask=%llx) at %s+0x%x
@item Target %s: Can't reproduce symbol %s, which is a %s%s%s
@item Option '%s' requires an argument
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Calculated value 0x%llx doesn't fit into relocation type %s (offset=%d, size=%d, mask=0x%llx)
@item UNUSED
@item %s: Malformatted archive member %s
@item %s: Empty archive ignored
@item %s: %s doesn't support shared objects in library archives
@item %s: %s doesn't support executables in library archives
@item %s (%s): Illegal format / file corrupted
@item %s: Consistency check for archive member %s failed
@item %s: Invalid ELF section header index (%d) in %s
@item %s: ELF section header #%d has illegal offset in %s
@item %s: ELF section header string table has illegal type in %s
@item %s: ELF section header string table has illegal offset in %s
@item %s: ELF program header table in %s was ignored
@item %s: ELF section header type %d in %s is not needed in relocatable objects
@item %s: Illegal section offset for %s in %s
@item %s: ELF %s table has illegal type in %s
@item %s: ELF %s table has illegal offset in %s
@item %s: %s in %s defines relocations relative to a non-existing section with index=%d
@item %s: Symbol %s, defined in %s, has an invalid reference to a non-existing section with index=%d
@item %s: Illegal symbol type %d for %s in %s
@item %s: Symbol %s has illegal binding type %d in %s
@item %s: Symbol %s in %s is multiply defined
@item %s: Merging a code section with name "__MERGED"
@item Relative references between %s section "%s" and %s section "%s" (%s) force a combination of the two
@item Can't define %s as ctors/dtors label. Symbol already exists.
@item %s: ELF section header type %d in %s is not needed in shared objects
@item %s: Endianness differs from previous objects
@item Target file format doesn't support relocatable objects
@item Predefined limits of destination memory region %s for section %s were exceeded (0x%llx)
@item Section %s(%s) was not recognized by target linker script
@item %s line %d: Unknown keyword <%s> ignored
@item %s line %d: '%c' expected
@item %s line %d: Absolute number expected
@item %s line %d: Keyword <%s> expected
@item %s line %d: GNU command <%s> ignored
@item %s line %d: Unknown memory region <%s>
@item %s line %d: Multiple constructor types in output file
@item %s line %d: Unknown keyword <%s>
@item %s line %d: Assertion failed: %s
@item %s line %d: SECTIONS block defined twice
@item %s line %d: Segment %s is closed and can't be reused
@item %s line %d: Address overrides specified %cMA memory region
@item %s line %d: Segment %s must include both, FILEHDR and PHDR
@item %s line %d: Missing argument
@item %s line %d: Undefined section: <%s>
@item %s line %d: Section %s was assigned to more than one PT_LOAD segment
@item Multiple use of section <%s> in linker script
@item Intermediate uninitialized sections in ELF segment <%s> (first=<%s>, last=<%s>) will be turned into initialized
@item Section <%s> (0x%llx-0x%llx) conflicts with ELF segment <%s> (currently: 0x%llx-0x%llx)
@item %s: QMAGIC is deprecated and will no longer be supported
@item %s: a.out %s table has illegal offset or size in %s
@item %s: a.out %s table size in <%s> is not a multiple of %d
@item %s: a.out symbol name has illegal offset %ld in %s
@item %s: a.out symbol %s has illegal binding type %d in %s
@item %s: a.out relocations without an appropriate section in %s
@item %s: illegal a.out relocation in section %s of %s at offset 0x%08lx: <pcrel=%d len=%d ext=%d brel=%d jmptab=%d rel=%d copy=%d>
@item %s: illegal a.out external reference to symbol %s in %s, which is no external symbol
@item %s: illegal nlist type %lu in a.out relocation in section %s of %s at offset 0x%08lx
@item Target %s: Common symbol %s is unreferenced and will disappear
@item Target file format doesn't support executable files
@item %s: a.out relocation <pcrel=%d len=%d ext=%d brel=%d jmptab=%d rel=%d copy=%d> is treated as a normal relocation in section %s of %s at offset 0x%08lx
@item %s: size %d for a.out symbol %s in %s was ignored
@item Target %s: %s section must not be absent for a valid executable file
@item Target %s: Section %s is overlapping %s
@item %s line %d: Illegal PHDR type: <%s>
@item %s line %d: <%s> behind SECTIONS ignored
@item %s line %d: Address symbol '.' invalid outside SECTIONS block
@item %s line %d: Reference to non-absolute symbol <%s> outside SECTIONS
@item %s line %d: Division by zero
@item %s line %d: Unknown symbol or function: <%s>
@item %s line %d: No function-calls allowed here
@item %s line %d: Symbol <%s> is not yet assigned
@item %s line %d: Command <%s> not allowed outside SECTIONS block
@item %s line %d: Address symbol '.' cannot be provided
@item %s line %d: Symbol <%s> already defined
@item %s line %d: Only absolute expressions may be assigned outside SECTIONS block
@item %s line %d: Unknown PHDR: <%s>
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Cannot resolve reference to %s, because section %s was not recognized by the linker script
@item %s (%s): %d bits per byte are not supported
@item %s (%s): %d bytes per target-address are not supported
@item %s (%s): Relocation type %d (offset=%lld, bit-offset=%d bit-size=%d mask=0x%llx referring to symbol <%s> (type %d) is not supported
@item %s (%s): Symbol type %d for <%s> in section %s is not supported
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Cannot resolve %s reference to %s, because host section %s is invalid
@item %s: Malformatted ELF %s section in %s
@item %s: Ignoring junk at end of ELF %s section in %s
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Relocation based on missing %s section
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Base-relative reference to code section
@item Relocation table format not supported by selected output format - reverting to %s's standard
@item Unknown relocation table format '%s' ignored
@item Target %s: multiple small-data sections not allowed
@item .ctors/.dtors spread over multiple sections
@item Dynamic symbol reference not supported by target %s
@item %s: ELF symbol name has illegal offset 0x%lx in %s
@item %s: Unknown endianness defaults to %s-endian. Consider using -EB/-EL
@item Resetting the same attribute for section %s
@item Bad assignment after option '%s'
@item Need a valid symbolic entry when using -gc-all
@item Executable code section in first object required when using -gc-all
@item Unsupported absolute relocation (offs=%lld pos=%d siz=%d msk=0x%llx) in resident data section
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Absolute reference to resident data section (%s)
@item %s line %d: Undefined memory region: <%s>
@item Target %s: multiple %s sections not allowed: <%s> and <%s>
@item %s: symbol index %u is out of range
@item %s: %s is chained
@item Maximum file option size exceeded (%u)
@item %s: Ignoring weak symbol %s
@item %s: Unexpected relocations for section with index=%d
@item Bad error number: %d
@item Error number %d is not a warning
@item %s (%s): alternating bits per byte in object files (from %d to %d)
@item %s (%s): alternating bytes per address in object files (from %d to %d)
@item Endianness is unknown. Default to host endianness.
@item Mismatching target address sizes in input/output formats
@item %s: Hunk format corrupted: DEBUG hunk used like a section with name "%s" in unit "%s". Trying to ignore
@item %s: Duplicate con/destructor name %s definition ignored

@end enumerate

@bye
